docs: add oidc configuration with auth0 and idp groups WD-18947 (#15116)
canonical/lxd: doc/howto/oidc_auth0.md

1. Back in the Auth0 interface for your application, copy the {guilabel}`Client ID` and use it in your LXD server configuration:

       lxc config set oidc.client.id=6f6f6f6f6f6f

1. Finally go back to the Auth0 interface, navigate to {guilabel}`Applications`, then {guilabel}`APIs` and copy the {guilabel}`API Audience` value. Use it as OIDC audience in your LXD server configuration:

       lxc config set oidc.audience=https://dev-example.us.auth0.com/api/v2/

Now you can access the LXD UI with any browser and use single sign on login. Enter the credentials for Auth0.

## Setup custom claim for permission group mapping
An admin user may set up multiple users in Auth0 and allocate roles to those users. When a specific user logs in using OIDC, the allocated roles for that user can be mapped to LXD permission groups by using custom claims set in Auth0. This section details steps for setting up roles for a user on Auth0 as well as the custom claim so that LXD can map those roles to permission groups.

1. Start in Auth0, under {guilabel}`User Management` -> {guilabel}`Users`, create a new user, provide an email and password for that user.

> 1. Under {guilabel}`User Management` -> {guilabel}`Roles`, create some roles with suitable names.

Author: Good idea, switched the two.

1. Go to the user you created in step 1, select on the {guilabel}`Roles` tab then select {guilabel}`Assign Roles`. Select the roles you just created in step 2.

1. You will need to set up a custom action on Auth0 to set the custom claim on the id_token during the OIDC login flow.
    - Under {guilabel}`Actions` -> {guilabel}`Library`, select on {guilabel}`Create Action`. Give the action a suitable name like `roles-in-id-token`, select {guilabel}`Login / Post Login` for the Trigger and leave the Runtime selection as recommended. Select {guilabel}`Create` and you will be redirected to a code editor. Insert the code snippet shown below and hit {guilabel}`Deploy`:

    ```javascript
    exports.onExecutePostLogin = async (event, api) => {
      if (event.authorization) {

>         api.idToken.setCustomClaim(`lxd-idp-groups`, event.authorization.roles);

Reviewer: Is `lxd-idp-groups` meant to be modified by the user based on what the role they created is named?

Author: This is the name of the field in the id_token that contains the list of roles a user has in auth0. It is the value that we configure in LXD as `oidc.groups.claim` on the server settings. The value is free of choice and not related to the role names.

        api.accessToken.setCustomClaim(`lxd-idp-groups`, event.authorization.roles);
      }
    };
    ```

>     - Once the action is deployed, go to {guilabel}`Actions` -> {guilabel}`Flows` -> {guilabel}`Login`, under the {guilabel}`Custom actions tab`, drag the action you just created and drop it in between the Start and Complete nodes of the Login flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Once the action is deployed, go to {guilabel}`Actions` > {guilabel}`Flows` > {guilabel}`Login`. Under the {guilabel}`Custom actions` tab, drag the action you just created and drop it in between the {guilabel}`Start` and {guilabel}`Complete` nodes of the Login flow.
```

>     - Once the action is deployed, go to {guilabel}`Actions` -> {guilabel}`Flows` -> {guilabel}`Login`, under the {guilabel}`Custom actions tab`, drag the action you just created and drop it in between the Start and Complete nodes of the Login flow.

Reviewer: In testing, I do not see a Flows option under Actions:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1c651126-80a7-4c57-aece-7ce11bbbf14f)

Author: This was remodelled in their interface since we wrote this tutorial. This hsould relate to triggers > post login. I updated it to match the current interface.

> 1. Navigate to LXD UI, you should first authenticate using a trusted certificate, that way you can configure server settings without permission issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to the LXD UI. First authenticate with the UI using a trusted certificate so that you can configure server settings without permission issues.
```

> 1. Now in LXD UI, under {guilabel}`settings` find `oidc.groups.claim`. Set it to the custom claim you have set in step 4. Using the current example, the custom claim is `lxd-idp-groups`. You can do this with `lxc config set oidc.groups.claim=lxd-idp-groups` on the command line as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the LXD UI, under {guilabel}`settings`, find `oidc.groups.claim`. Set it to the custom claim configured in step 4. Using the current example, the custom claim is `lxd-idp-groups`. Alternatively, use the command line: `lxc config set oidc.groups.claim=lxd-idp-groups`.
```

> 1. Continue in LXD UI, navigate to {guilabel}`Permissions` -> {guilabel}`IDP groups` select {guilabel}`Create IDP Group` for assigning roles from Auth0 to permission groups created int LXD. For each identity provider group created in LXD, the name of the identity provider group must match a role you have created in Auth0, and it should map to one or more permission groups in LXD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Continuing in the LXD UI, navigate to {guilabel}`Permissions` > {guilabel}`IDP groups` and click {guilabel}`Create IDP Group`. Here you can map roles from Auth0 to permission groups created in LXD. For each identity provider group created in LXD, the name of the identity provider group must match a role you have created in Auth0, and it should also map to one or more permission groups in LXD.
```

> 1. Lastly, you will need to log in as a user with roles assigned in Auth0. During the OIDC flow, LXD will automatically extract the custom claim from the user's `id_token` based on the LXD `oidc.groups.claim` configuration value. The extracted custom claim is an array of roles for your user from Auth0, those roles will then be mapped to LXD permission groups using the identity provider group that you created in step 6.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Lastly, you must log in as a user with roles assigned in Auth0. During the OIDC flow, LXD automatically extracts the custom claim from the user's `id_token` based on the LXD `oidc.groups.claim` configuration value. The extracted custom claim is an array of roles for your user from Auth0. Those roles are then mapped to LXD permission groups using the identity provider group created in step 6.
```

(oidc-auth0)=
# How to configure Auth0 as login method for the LXD UI

> Auth0 is a flexible, drop-in solution to add authentication and authorization services to your applications. Auth0 supports OIDC and can be used to authenticate users for the LXD UI. This guide shows you how to set up Auth0.com as the login method for the LXD UI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Auth0 is a flexible, drop-in solution to add authentication and authorization services to your applications. Auth0 supports OIDC and can be used to authenticate users for the LXD UI and CLI. This guide shows you how to set up Auth0.com as the login method for the LXD UI and CLI.
```

> ## Using Auth0.com to access the LXD UI

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Using Auth0.com to access LXD
```

1. Open a free account on [Auth0.com](https://auth0.com/).

1. Once logged into the Auth0 web interface, from the main navigation's {guilabel}`Applications` section, select {guilabel}`Applications` > {guilabel}`Create application`.
    - Use the default type of {guilabel}`Native` and click {guilabel}`Create`.

1. Go to the {guilabel}`Settings` tab of your new application.
    - Scroll to the {guilabel}`Allowed Callback URLs` field in this tab and enter your LXD UI address, followed by `/oidc/callback`.
      - Example: `https://example.com:8443/oidc/callback`
      - An IP address can be used instead of a domain name.
      - Note `:8443` is the default listening port for the LXD server. It might differ for your setup. You can verify the LXD configuration value `core.https_address` to find the correct port for your LXD server. 
    - Enable {guilabel}`Allow Refresh Token Rotation`.

>     - Scroll down to {guilabel}`Advanced Settings` and select the {guilabel}`Grant Types` tab. Enable {guilabel}`Device code`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Scroll down to {guilabel}`Advanced Settings` and select the {guilabel}`Grant Types` tab. Enable {guilabel}`Device code`.
    The device code grant type is required for OIDC authentication using the LXD CLI.
```

    - Select {guilabel}`Save Changes`.

1. Near the top of the {guilabel}`Settings` tab, locate the {guilabel}`Domain` field. Copy the value and add the `https://` prefix and the `/` suffix as in the example below. This is your OIDC issuer for LXD. Set this value in your LXD server configuration with the command:

       lxc config set oidc.issuer=https://dev-example.us.auth0.com/

1. From your Auth0 application's {guilabel}`Settings` tab, copy the {guilabel}`Client ID` and use it in your LXD server configuration:

       lxc config set oidc.client.id=6f6f6f6f6f6f

1. Finally, in the Auth0 interface's main navigation,  under {guilabel}`Applications`, select {guilabel}`Applications` > {guilabel}`APIs`. Copy the {guilabel}`API Audience` value, then use it as the OIDC audience in your LXD server configuration:

       lxc config set oidc.audience=https://dev-example.us.auth0.com/api/v2/

> Now you can access the LXD UI with any browser and use single sign-on (SSO) login. Enter the credentials for Auth0.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now you can access the LXD UI with any browser and use single sign-on (SSO) login. Enter the credentials for Auth0.
You can also access LXD using the CLI with

    lxc remote add <remote-name> <LXD-address> --auth-type oidc

This will open a browser where you must confirm the device code displayed in the terminal window, and log in with the credentials for Auth0.

```

Users will have no permissions by default. You must set up permission groups in LXD to grant access to projects and instances. For connecting the permission group to a user you have two options:

1. Map LXD permission groups to the user directly. The user object in LXD will only be created on the first login of that user to LXD.
 

> 1. Configure roles in Aut0 and use automatic mapping to LXD groups as described below.

Reviewer 2: Can you add links to relevant sections here please? There are sections on fine-grained authorization in `doc/explanation/authorization.md`

    - In the code editor, insert the code snippet shown below:

    ```javascript
    exports.onExecutePostLogin = async (event, api) => {
      if (event.authorization) {
        api.idToken.setCustomClaim(`lxd-idp-groups`, event.authorization.roles);
        api.accessToken.setCustomClaim(`lxd-idp-groups`, event.authorization.roles);
      }
    };
    ```

    - Select {guilabel}`Deploy`.
    - Once the action is deployed, go to {guilabel}`Actions` > {guilabel}`Triggers` > {guilabel}`post-login`. Under the {guilabel}`Add Action` > {guilabel}`Custom` tab, drag the action you just created and drop it in between the {guilabel}`Start` and {guilabel}`Complete` nodes of the Login flow. Select {guilabel}`Apply` to save the changes.

1. Navigate to the LXD UI. First authenticate with the UI using a trusted certificate so that you can configure server settings without permission issues.

1. In the LXD UI, under {guilabel}`settings`, find `oidc.groups.claim`. Set it to the custom claim configured in step 4. Using the current example, the custom claim is `lxd-idp-groups`. Alternatively, use the command line: `lxc config set oidc.groups.claim=lxd-idp-groups`.

> 1. Continuing in the LXD UI, navigate to {guilabel}`Permissions` > {guilabel}`IDP groups` and click {guilabel}`Create IDP Group`. Here you can map roles from Auth0 to permission groups created in LXD. For each identity provider group created in LXD, the name of the identity provider group must match a role you have created in Auth0, and it should also map to one or more permission groups in LXD.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Continuing in the LXD UI, navigate to {guilabel}`Permissions` > {guilabel}`IDP groups` and click {guilabel}`Create IDP Group`. Here you can map roles from Auth0 to permission groups created in LXD. For each identity provider group created in LXD, the name of the identity provider group must match a role you have created in Auth0, and it should also map to one or more permission groups in LXD.
Alternatively, use the command line:

    lxc auth identity-provider-group create <auth0-group-name>
    lxc auth identity-provider-group group add <auth0-group-name> <LXD-group-name>
```
